[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> LISA GARR: Hi.
This is Lisa Garr, host
of Gaiam Inspirations.
We are coming to you live
from the Gaiam Studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
And since this is a
live interactive show,
we encourage you to communicate
with us on Facebook and Twitter
and let us know your
thoughts, ask our question--
ask our guests live
questions on the air,
and we'll come back to
you with the answers.
All right, so today we are
talking about superfoods.
We're talking about the foods
that are a complete protein,
and that they are some of the
most powerful, mineral-rich,
plant-based foods on Earth.
And they've been used by ancient
civilizations long before ours.
Joining me is David Wolfe.
He is one of the
world's top authorities
on natural health,
nutrition, chocolate,
and organic superfoods.
Welcome to the show, David.
>> DAVID WOLFE: Thank you.
How are you?
>> LISA: Oh, excellent.
Thank you for joining us.
>> WOLFE: It's great, always.
>> LISA: So tell me,
what is a superfood,
for people who have
not heard about them.
>> WOLFE: A superfood would
be the most powerful food that
a civilization has identified
in their ecosystem.
For example, the
Polynesians identified
noni, the super fruit, noni.
The Egyptians, aloe vera,
the Chinese, the goji berry,
the Central American shamans
and South American shamans,
the cacao bean.
In the Andes, it was maca.
>> LISA: And these are foods
that they sustain their entire
cultures on.
>> WOLFE: Right, they
were usually the center
of the medicine wheel of
that culture and their herbal
system.
Like, for example,
in Central America,
cacao is at the center.
So all your herbal medicaments
that you would use,
whether it's cayenne pepper or
whether it was piper ornatum,
or whatever interesting
herb they were using,
always went through chocolate.
That's how it was delivered.
>> LISA: Interesting.
>> WOLFE: Usually
bitter, actually.
>> LISA: Well, you have the--
and we're going to be doing
an amazing drink
demonstration later with some
of David's exclusive recipes.
So get your pens and
paper ready for that one.
But so the raw cacao nut.
>> WOLFE: Nut.
It's a nut, botanically.
>> LISA: It's a nut, right?
>> WOLFE: Yes.
>> LISA: And that's where
chocolate is derived from.
>> WOLFE: That's right.
>> LISA: We're going to
go a lot into this later.
But so this is a
complete superfood?
This has protein in it?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
Well, it's not the
best source of protein.
Like, it's not as much protein
as spirulina, for example.
But spirulina and chocolate
were eaten together
by the ancient Mexicans
and ancient Toltecs
and Olmecs and Mayans
for thousands of years.
>> LISA: Wow.
All right, so show us what
some of the superfoods are.
>> WOLFE: OK, well
let's go through,
and we'll look at
some images here.
We've got maca right there.
Maca is the highest altitude
crop in the new world.
And there's only probably
a few medicaments
worldwide that are
at that elevation.
We're talking about
16,000 feet elevation--
>> LISA: Where is it grown?
>> WOLFE: --that level.
And that's in the Andes.
And maca is in the
cruciferous vegetable family.
So it's like the same family
as broccoli and wild mustard,
and cauliflower, and
brussels sprouts.
So it's--
>> LISA: So
cancer-fighting food?
>> WOLFE: Very powerful.
Yeah, there's-- actually any
food that's able to survive
at that atmospheric level
is usually very powerful.
For example, in
Chinese medicine,
cordyceps comes from
that level of altitude.
Rhodiola comes from that
level of altitude, snow lotus.
And then in the new
world, it's maca.
But maca has calories.
So you can actually eat it.
You can bite into it.
You can buy it fresh
in the markets in Peru.
It's a true adaptogen.
It increases
your uptake of oxygen.
>> LISA: I've also heard
it's really good for hormonal
balancing, and--
>> WOLFE: Yeah, it's
excellent for hormones.
And it's somewhat of a
subtle aphrodisiac as well.
>> LISA: It is?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: Maca, and so
is chocolate, right?
>> WOLFE: Yeah,
and chocolate, too.
Chocolate and maca have
been eaten together
for thousands of years.
>> LISA: Really?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: OK, what's another one?
>> WOLFE: Another one there
that you see in the images,
goji berries.
And goji berries are
highly, highly regarded
in Chinese medicine--
perhaps as the highest
member of that entire litany
of pharmacologically
active herbs.
And goji berry is--
the reason why it's called
goji berries it's because it
comes from a place called--
it was called Gagi, that was
like the way they pronounce it.
The Ningxia province in
that region of China,
as well as it spreads out
into the deserts of Mongolia
and even up into the base
mountains of the Himalayas.
This substance is
always at the center
of the Chinese
herbal formulations
because according to, when
the Europeans went over
there to categorize that
herbal system in the 1750s--
or I think was a
little bit later than
that-- they asked the Shaolin
monks, where do we start?
And they said, this
is the plant you
start with because this is
the one that teaches you
about all the others.
Hence, the name, the
genus, in the Latin
binomial of goji
berry, which is Lyceum.
Lyceum comes from Plato's
school of learning.
Lyceum is a Greek
word for school.
>> LISA: So within
the goji berry,
it is a complete source--
>> WOLFE: It's a
complete protein.
>> LISA: It's a
complete protein,
meaning it has protein--
>> WOLFE: It has all
the amino acids in it.
It has actually 18
amino acids and all
the essential amino acids, which
is very unusual for a berry.
It also is a very good source
of zeaxanthin, probably
one of the best in the world.
That's what gives it its
orange and red pigment.
>> LISA: Zinc?
>> WOLFE: No, zeaxanthin.
>> LISA: Oh.
>> WOLFE: That's a carotenoid.
There's a lot of carotenoids
in goji berries, which
are like beta carotene, and
this is for your eyesight.
So goji berry's one of the best
foods for eyesight and brain
going.
>> LISA: And brain--
now, why brain?
>> WOLFE: Brain as well.
Well, not only does it
contain the carotenoids,
which get into your
eyes and your brain,
but it also contains
sesquiterpenes which are--
they're molecules that are
like dialed one-and-a-half,
sesquiterpenes.
They're oils.
They're very
interesting oils that
help your brain secrete
human growth hormone.
This is the only food
known in the world that
helps your body naturally
secrete more human growth
hormone.
>> LISA: It's amazing that
that all comes from nature.
It's just a perfect
balance in a single food.
>> WOLFE: What's even more
amazing is that the Chinese
discovered this 5,000
years ago and knew.
And they didn't have any
of the analytical chemistry
that we have now or scientific
analysis techniques,
but they were able to
figure this all out.
>> LISA: That's why we've seen
it hit the health food scene
the recent decade.
>> WOLFE: Yes.
It's like a sensation.
Because when I first came across
goji berries, I was like, whoa,
this tastes good.
Like, people eat this.
>> LISA: Yeah.
>> WOLFE: People eat raisins.
They'll eat this--
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: --for sure.
But this has a whole herbal back
end that puts raisins to shame,
especially the seedless
raisins we have.
>> LISA: So they're
slightly sweet.
But do they balance the blood
sugar levels or are they--
>> WOLFE: Well,
they're slightly sweet.
But what's interesting, the
wild goji berries, about 50%
of its sugars--
this is a whole other thing
that goji berry does--
50% of the sugars
of a wild goji berry
are long chain
polysaccharides, which means
they're like aloe vera or noni.
They have immunological
properties.
>> LISA: Wow.
>> WOLFE: And that's
really interesting.
Now, the domesticated goji
berry, maybe it's about 36%
is these long chain
polysaccharides.
And these long chain sugars
are immunologically active.
They also can get
into your joints.
They activate your brain.
They're great for
long-term energy.
And it's what gives goji berry
really a big part of its magic.
>> LISA: OK.
So Jesse on Facebook is asking,
what are some of the superfoods
that they can get at a
regular grocery store?
>> WOLFE: Probably
turmeric comes to mind.
>> LISA: Turmeric?
>> WOLFE: Turmeric.
Yeah, that's really a superfood.
My friends who work
on our farm in Hawaii,
they live on turmeric.
That's, like, one
of the main things.
>> LISA: Is that a root?
>> WOLFE: It's a root.
It looks like ginger.
And it has a tremendous
amount of curcuminoids in it,
which is these really
deep orange pigments.
They'll stain everything.
And it's one of the great
superfoods on the planet.
It's very powerful
anti-inflammatory,
probably the most powerful
anti-inflammatory--
>> LISA: Really?
>> WOLFE: --you
can buy in a store.
>> LISA: Is that
also called turmeric?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: It's actually
spelled T-U-R-M-E-R-I-C,
not T-U-M-E-R-I-C.
>> LISA: Oh, really?
>> WOLFE: So, it's turmeric.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: It's
always misspelled.
>> LISA: It's powdered.
>> WOLFE: I've even seen people
who put out turmeric products,
and they have it misspelled
on their own label.
>> LISA: I think I have
one of those bottles.
[LAUGHTER] Exactly.
>> WOLFE: That
confuses everybody.
>> LISA: So name some
of the other superfoods.
>> WOLFE: So you'll
see there, raw cacao.
And chocolate is the
number one antioxidant
food in the world--
raw chocolate is.
And it's about--
actually before you
even-- when you just
cut it out of the fruit,
before you let it do anything,
before it sprouts, before it
turns brown, it's purple.
In the purple state--
>> LISA: Ooh, really?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, that cacao
bean is actually about--
can be as high as
13% antioxidants,
by far the highest of
any food in the world.
>> LISA: Cacao?
>> WOLFE: Yes.
>> LISA: Raw cacao.
And plus it has
magnesium, calcium.
>> WOLFE: It's not
necessarily a calcium source,
but it's an excellent
magnesium source.
It's probably the
best in the world.
It's very high in
iron and manganese,
the highest of any plant food.
It's extraordinarily
rich in chromium.
So it's very good for
blood sugar balance.
And these are things that
we're going to get into later.
>> LISA: Yeah, we're going to
get into this in the secret
energy elixir.
All right.
Another superfood.
>> WOLFE: Another one I'm
really into are the marine
phytoplanktons.
Let's see if we've
got an image of that.
Oh, we've got the raw--
>> LISA: Oh.
>> WOLFE: Let's do these first--
>> LISA: We can't
forget the bees.
>> WOLFE: --and then we'll talk
about marine phytoplanktons.
The bees-- being a beekeeper--
I became a beekeeper,
and I'm always
learning more about beekeeping.
The bees are able to procure
from any environment, even
an environment that would
be very difficult for us
to survive in, like a desert--
they're able to procure
protein for you.
They're able to procure glucose
and calories, basically,
from an environment where
it's very difficult to procure
calories.
>> LISA: How do they
procure protein, bees?
>> WOLFE: Well, they actually
collect it from pollens.
And pollens are usually
complete protein sources.
Like, the pollen of a flower?
>> LISA: Really?
>> WOLFE: Now, it's hard to
actually eat enough flowers
to get that much protein,
but the bee does it for you.
And then they'll mix it
down into, for example,
royal jelly, which is
what they feed the queen.
That extends the
queen's lifespan
from say three to six
weeks to seven years.
>> LISA: And that is an
incredible energy source.
>> WOLFE: It's an incredible
source of B vitamins.
Actually, it's easy to
remember, bee products
contain B vitamins.
>> LISA: Oh, that's perfect.
>> WOLFE: That's easy
to remember, right?
>> LISA: And those
are great for stress.
>> WOLFE: Very important
for longevity and stress.
>> LISA: Lowering
cortisol levels.
>> WOLFE: Yes.
And liver.
Vitamin B5 is very
important for the liver.
And bee pollen is an
excellent source of that,
but even better is royal jelly.
>> LISA: A good detoxifier then?
>> WOLFE: Yes, they
are detoxifiers, yes.
>> LISA: OK, great.
>> WOLFE: And what I like
about the bee products, too,
is that they're
your environment.
They are a summation
of your environment.
>> LISA: And also, it's good to
eat local when you're in that
area of the bee products
that are around.
>> WOLFE: I usually
have my local honeys,
and then I have my exotic honey.
Depending on the
situation, you have
friends over, you're making
them a tea or something,
I'm going to put an
exotic honey in there.
But for the day to
day usage, I like
to have my own honey
front my front yard.
>> LISA: What's an exotic honey?
>> WOLFE: An exotic honey might
be a Pohutukawa honey from New
Zealand, for example.
>> LISA: Oh, is there
a difference in taste?
>> WOLFE: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Yes.
And it could mean a
white honey from Canada.
It could mean a honey from
the jungles of Africa,
which I have all this stuff
in my fridge-- every--
I mean, all over the world.
>> LISA: So one of
our honeys here--
one--
[LAUGHS]
>> WOLFE: One of our honeys.
>> LISA: --is asking, what if
you want to incorporate these
superfoods into your family?
How do you do it easily?
How do you incorporate
superfoods in your family?
Family's, like, meal plan, diet.
>> WOLFE: Probably the best
idea is don't tell them.
Just mix it into stuff,
and then later say,
let me tell you what I've
been doing for the last three
months.
>> LISA: OK, so you mentioned
some of the higher protein
index superfoods which are
the marine phytoplankton.
>> WOLFE: Yeah, you
can look at that.
That's really great.
So marine-- the
original ecosystem
of this Earth, way back
when, was basically algae,
and it was freshwater
algae and saltwater algaes.
And there are all
different kinds still here.
There's like 40,000 still here.
>> LISA: The algae that we see
growing on the ground on rocks?
>> WOLFE: Right, yeah.
That you might see
washed up on a rock next
to a creek or
something like that,
or sometimes you
see it in the ocean.
>> LISA: One would not
think to go eat that.
>> WOLFE: Yeah, you
wouldn't think that.
But over the years,
the human race
has figured out some
of them are edible.
Like, spirulina is coming out
of Lake Texcoco in Mexico,
for example, near
Mexico City has provided
hundreds of thousands
of tons of spirulina
for the people living there, and
has always been the number one
protein source in the area for
the people living in that area.
>> LISA: I wonder why it
develops as a protein.
>> WOLFE: It's just the way
these ancient organisms are.
They're about 60%
to 70% protein,
and they can contain a
high fraction of oils.
Like, some marine phytoplankton
can be as high as 30% oils
and even contain DHA and
EPA, the same material that's
in fish oil.
So if you're a
vegan or vegetarian,
you want to go to that because
you can get the brain chemistry
oils that are in fish oil
without having to kill fish.
>> LISA: So these are the--
let's see, we've got
marine phytoplankton,
the blue green
algae, the spirulina.
>> WOLFE: These are common
ones that we hear about.
Chlorella is also
a very good one.
>> LISA: A very good one, right.
>> WOLFE: Yes, very good.
>> LISA: And we're
going to see that later.
>> WOLFE: We're going
to see that later.
>> LISA: It's really,
really pretty.
So Jamal, caller
from Brooklyn, what
are some of the baby steps
of getting into herbalism
on a limited budget?
>> WOLFE: Well, it's a great
thing about herbalism is you
just start with your
own neighborhood.
And you go out with a book or
you go out with a smartphone,
and you just start
looking at things
and being able to
identify certain things.
I think a great
way to do that is
to find somebody who is
an herbalist in your area
or a mycologist, somebody
who's a mushroom person
and who does tours.
That's how I started.
And will take you out for
like two or three hours
and show you different things.
And then you start realizing,
oh, OK, this is that.
And then you can develop a
little bit of an interaction
with your ecosystem,
which is always free.
>> LISA: That's true.
>> WOLFE: It's free.
You can go--
>> WOLFE: Herbalism is the
cheapest way to live ever
devised.
It actually is-- it's like
ancient humans weren't
working all day.
They weren't working all day.
They were actually
playing all day,
and maybe they'd go forage for
food for maybe three or four
hours, and that was totally fun.
>> LISA: But this
was their work,
was finding these foods in
their environment and sustaining
their communities.
All right.
So back to the superfoods.
So we've got the bees, we've
got the marine phytoplanktons,
we've got the berries and
those types of things.
And they're all mineral-rich,
they're all plant-based,
and they're all various
sources of protein, which is
why they're called superfoods.
>> WOLFE: Right.
I like superfoods being
plant-based because then it's
for everybody, right?
Because carnivores
will still eat plants,
but vegetarians or
vegans don't eat animals.
So we start there.
It's got to be inclusive.
This is one of the teachings--
David Hawkins'
teachings about truth,
is that whatever
truth is out there,
it's got to be inclusive.
That's part of the
fundamentals of truth.
>> LISA: So it's got
to work for everybody.
>> WOLFE: Everybody.
>> LISA: And the environment.
>> WOLFE: And the environment.
And we're not designed to
really eat, like, just lettuce.
I mean, I like
lettuce, it's great.
But that's-- we're designed
to eat noble substances.
>> LISA: To sustain us.
>> WOLFE: To sustain us.
Like, if we had
the choice, why not
go after the most noble
substances in your ecosystem,
whether that's like a ginseng
root, or a chaga mushroom,
or a reishi mushroom, or
it could be a goji berry,
or it could be wild
maca root or whatever,
depending on what
your ecosystem is.
That's what you want.
You want the most
powerful stuff.
Why settle for second-best?
>> LISA: Right.
We're going to get into a really
great demonstration of all
of these things mixed into
one drink for ultimate energy.
And it will go a lot more into
detail on the superfoods then.
All right, so let's
talk a little bit
about the anti-aging process.
And I know that you're
a big longevity expert.
So what is that process?
I mean, anti-aging, reversal
of aging, is it even possible?
How does that work?
>> WOLFE: OK, well, I first
want to say that having been
in the health food
world for so long,
that I have felt surges
of energy and well-being
and feelings of well-being
that have wanted to actually--
it caused me to want
to live, and I mean--
I really want to
say that because--
>> LISA: Interesting.
>> WOLFE: Somewhere,
subconsciously some of us may
be checking out a little bit.
>> LISA: Because our
bodies are in pain?
>> WOLFE: Because the pain,
the stress, the whatever it is,
the emotional turmoil, and
so when you feel good all
the time, you can actually get
into a state where you want
to live fully and you get rid of
these subconscious death urges.
>> LISA: Because--
>> WOLFE: Or something.
>> LISA: Absolutely.
I know exactly what
you're talking about.
All the diseases that
manifest from the depression
and anxiety, that come
from the heart disease,
that come from the diabetes,
and so forth, and all the pain
associated.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: Yeah.
>> WOLFE: And so that's how
I got interested in longevity
sciences.
And I started reading the old
books from the 1800s about some
of the documented
cases of people
who had lived to be 105,
110, 120, 130, 137, 166.
Li-Ching Yuen, who apparently
lived over 200 years.
And at some point-- there was a
yogi who lived to be over 180.
And at some point, I realized,
OK, this is probably real.
It's not just some
kind of fantasy.
>> LISA: Because we saw it
in so many different texts?
>> WOLFE: Yeah,
and it makes sense.
That there was a period of
time before the Industrial
Revolution where certain
herbal systems had become
so advanced and so
sophisticated and understanding,
and they were taught in
martial arts systems,
like in China, where it
was possible that somebody
could live to be 200 years old.
Sure.
And what were they doing
that was different?
And then what we
learn from that?
And what has science taught us?
And so that's where I get
my perspective on longevity.
>> LISA: It's interesting we
were having a conversation
a little while ago about martial
arts and how the beginning
of a fight would be starting
with one specific set of herbs,
and the end of the fight
would be the more jing.
>> WOLFE: Jing stuff.
Right.
We had that conversation.
>> LISA: It really has been used
in many different traditions
for a very long time.
A 5,000-year old system.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
And that's just since
it's been written down.
Right?
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: We're talking about
thousands of years of writing
this stuff down.
I'm sure these systems
existed all over the place,
it just wasn't written down.
>> LISA: So now, we're doing--
there's a lot of research
on growing telomeres and--
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
So let's look at that.
I'm going to bring
up an image here.
We have here an image
of the chromosome.
So that's like an X
chromosome, or it could just
be any one of the
chromosomes that are in our--
I think we have 23 pairs.
And at the end of
those chromosomes,
let's just jump back
there-- you'll see
that there's those red areas.
Those are damaged due
to genetic duplication
over the lifetime
of the cell line.
For example, muscle cells.
Every time they replicate
over your lifetime,
there's a little bit of damage
to the end of the chromosome
when it replicates.
It doesn't replicate perfectly.
There's a loss.
>> LISA: OK.
I see.
>> WOLFE: So that's
called a telomere,
that little end
that can be damaged,
that's the caps on your DNA.
And this has been
correlated to aging.
With every little
bit that's lost,
there's a genetic age and
a certain predisposition
towards disease, and frailty
that comes along with it.
>> LISA: So less
and less replicate,
and they replicate
in a damaged way?
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: And that's what the
loss of the telomeres causes.
>> WOLFE: Well, the loss-- yeah.
Yeah, sure.
It's a feedback loop.
So as you lose telomeres,
it accelerates more rapidly.
So what the idea
that is there a way
we can either slow this
process down, stop it,
and/or reverse it.
And the answer is,
yes, yes, and yes.
>> LISA: And there's
been research documented?
>> WOLFE: There's-- yeah,
research on this now is
conclusive that you
can actually stop it,
and you can even
genetically de-age yourself.
You can repair DNA damage,
or telomere damage.
>> LISA: This is
fairly recent research.
I mean--
>> WOLFE: This is
Nobel Prize research.
Let's see if we have an image
here of these Nobel Prize
scientists.
There they are right there.
The 2009 Nobel laureates
for basically breaking down
this whole science of
telomeres and telomerase.
And what was figured out
from this kind of research
was that there is a
substance that we know of,
that can actually
reverse genetic aging,
which is an astragalus,
which is a super--
or one of the top of herbs--
>> LISA: Back to the
Chinese medicine.
>> WOLFE: Back to
That the Chinese actually
figured this out.
They have actually figured
out that one of their herbs
has a property, in a certain
fraction of its nutrients,
that can be concentrated,
that actually flips
your whole aging off, and
actually genetically de-ages
you.
>> LISA: This is the research
that's been done about
astragalus?
>> WOLFE: That's correct.
>> LISA: And in a
concentrated form.
>> WOLFE: Astragalus side 4.
And we actually have astragalus
side 4 concentrate over here.
>> LISA: We're going to talk a
little bit about that in just
a second.
This is David's morning
ritual here, that he does.
We're going to talk a little
bit about how he stays so young.
He's actually 89.
And-- [LAUGHS]
>> WOLFE: I'm doing
the best I can.
>> LISA: All right.
So the telomeres-- the
whole idea behind anti-aging
and longevity is to
grow the telomeres,
that's the specific part--
>> WOLFE: That is
a specific idea.
That's one strategy.
And it's a really darn good
one, and it's definitely
something you want to consider.
>> LISA: OK, one of the
listeners is asking exactly--
Kim on Facebook--
how many superfoods
do you recommend
consuming each day?
Back to the superfoods question.
>> WOLFE: OK.
How many is a tough
question to answer.
I guess the better
question, or the better way
of me rephrasing that question--
it's a very good question--
is, how do you start
with this stuff?
And the answer is,
you don't eat it
in the way you ate normal food.
Goji berries are
extremely concentrated.
Marine phytoplankton is
>> LISA: So you don't
eat them like popcorn.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
And I've done that.
I was doing marine
phytoplankton--
I was in Europe, and
we went to a place
where they grow
marine phytoplankton.
And I had chips of
it, like whole chunks.
And I was dipping it into
honey, and dipping that
into some chaga that I
had, and then eating it
like a cracker or something.
About maybe 40 minutes
into it, my whole body
started heating up,
and I was like, oh, oh.
Wait, what's going on?
I got a weird feeling
over my whole body.
All of a sudden, I was
super hot, like, burning up.
And I was like, oh,
whoa, whales, right?
They're eating
marine phytoplankton
in the ocean in a
freezing Arctic Ocean.
>> LISA: To stay warm.
>> WOLFE: And so what's
a food that warms you up?
Well, of course, marine
phytoplankton with its oils,
and it has like
fish oil, basically.
And I was like, whoa.
And so I had to actually
go walking around outside.
I was in Denmark with shorts
on in the middle of November,
just to burn off that.
>> LISA: Do not
try this at home.
[LAUGHS]
>> WOLFE: So you've
got to start small.
And a lot of us
are not-- our liver
is a little too toxic to really
deal with really rich food.
Our whole lives, we
ate that much food,
we got that many nutrients.
Now I'm saying, you
eat this much food,
to get that many nutrients.
>> LISA: That's exactly how
you live your life, right?
I mean--
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: You live your life
with various energy drinks,
and various combinations
of these superfoods,
and herbs in drinks and tonics.
>> WOLFE: Mostly
in drinks, yeah.
>> LISA: In superfoods--
I mean in smoothies.
So Jane from Facebook is saying,
what do you do in the morning
when you wake up?
>> WOLFE: Well, first thing
I do is I drink water.
So I get up in the
morning and I drink water.
In terms of an eating
ritual, I always drink water.
The next thing I do is I
usually don't eat anything ever
in the morning, ever.
>> LISA: Nothing?
So you wait for the
detoxification process
to continue?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, I drink a lot
of water and then I'll wait
a while.
Sometimes I'll get caught up in
emails, or iPhone, or whatever.
Right, if that's how bad--
>> LISA: That's your meditation.
>> WOLFE: It's gotten that bad.
>> LISA: Good job.
[LAUGHS]
>> WOLFE: I get
up and it's like,
what's going on my cell phone?
And then--
>> LISA: We didn't say he
was a meditation expert.
We said--
>> WOLFE: I don't meditate.
I mean, I'm into it.
I think it's great for some
people, or for most people,
but I know my mission.
I know what I'm here to do.
>> LISA: What is that?
>> WOLFE: My mission is to
make superfoods, raw foods,
super herbs, living waters, and
advanced healing technologies
of choice for every person
on the whole planet.
That's my mission.
>> LISA: That's what
we're doing today.
>> WOLFE: And so
once you know that,
and once you know what you're
about, what you're going to do,
and how you're going
to do it, for me,
my work is my meditation.
>> LISA: You are very
clear about that.
I like that.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: Very
focused about that.
Back to Jane's question.
>> WOLFE: OK.
>> LISA: So what do you take
in the morning-- this is--
>> WOLFE: So I will put this--
sometimes, I will take--
like this morning, I got some
fresh organic local apple
juice, and I mixed all
this stuff in there.
I mixed the-- well,
let's start with TA65.
This is the astragalus
extract that
was identified by the Chinese
as being a telomerase activator,
the very first ever
discovered that we know about,
that's been told to us.
So this is an anti-aging
supplement, very powerful.
>> LISA: The most researched.
>> WOLFE: It's the
most researched.
It's proven to work.
And nothing else is
actually proven to work.
This is proven to work,
meaning it genetically de-ages
your cells, meaning
that if you take a test,
and we check your telomeres,
if you do this product for two
years, and then
we check it again,
you'll be four years
younger genetically.
>> LISA: So double-blind,
randomized studies for how
long?
>> WOLFE: Years.
Two-and-a-half years I
think is the longest.
>> LISA: OK.
All right.
>> WOLFE: So now, this right
here is something I've been
taking for a year, the TA65.
And what I noticed after
about the first month is
like, oh, oh, energy.
Like really primordial energy
like I had when I was 16.
>> LISA: Did it take
time to build or?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, I guess so.
It took about a month.
And then all of a
sudden, I'm like wanting
to go out running in
the middle of the night.
And stuff like that, which
I hadn't been-- had that
going on in a long time.
>> LISA: The running
in the night, OK.
>> WOLFE: Yeah, or like,
oh, I need to go jog off
in the middle of the night, and
just run to see what happens,
and getting it
back into running.
That's great.
>> LISA: That's great.
So you had a lot of energy,
energy production from this.
>> WOLFE: Now, this
is very expensive.
So I went to Ron Teeguarden,
who's a good friend of mine,
and he knows about this product,
and he knows how to make it.
And I said-- as
we've talked about it
before for a long
time, and I know
he's been working on
this for 20 years.
And I said, Ron,
now is the time.
You need to put
your thing together
and we need to get it into a
lower price that's reasonable
so that people can afford this.
And so he created
the Super Pill 2.
And this is taking
components of the TA65
and mixing it more into
an herbal formulation that
takes into account
the philosophy
of Chinese medicine-- the three
treasure system, the five organ
system, the 12
meridians, yin and yang.
And that's what the
Super Pill 2 is.
So I take these two together.
And I do anywhere from
two of these each,
like two Super
Pills and two TA65--
>> LISA: In the morning?
>> WOLFE: In the morning--
or four of each.
>> LISA: And then what is this?
>> WOLFE: This is reishi
mushrooms spore oil.
This is the most powerful
immunological product
ever discovered in the world.
>> LISA: Immune system?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, and so this--
listen to this statistic
that's on here.
This is something else.
Right here it says
this, "Reishi spore oil
is estimated to be 700 times as
potent as raw reishi mushroom."
>> LISA: Oh so the
oil itself is--
>> WOLFE: Reishi mushroom is the
number one immunological herb
on Earth.
This is 700 times more powerful.
>> LISA: Oh my goodness,
and this is a capsule?
>> WOLFE: This is actually--
it's an a gelatin cap,
so what I do is I bite into
it, squeeze the oil out,
and spit it out.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: The oil tastes OK.
>> LISA: And then this is?
>> WOLFE: OK this
is Estro Guard.
This is something I'll do--
I sometimes do it in the
morning with all of these.
But this is designed to
drive bad estrogen out
of your system.
This is affecting everybody.
I've talked to the top doctors
in the world, my friend Dr. Yu,
he studied this 35 years.
And he is convinced that
pretty much the pollution
of our environment
has contaminated us
with bad estrogen. Like for
example, BPA, plasticizers,
plastic itself,
residues of pesticides
are all xenoestrogens.
They're fake estrogens.
Plus we have a bunch of
fake estrogens in our diet,
like a lot of soy products.
So you have to drive it out.
And Estro Guard, it
educates your body
on how to drive it out.
It works-- is very
interesting product.
It's made out of broccoli.
>> LISA: So this
is David's system.
What we're going to do is we're
going to take a quick break.
When we come back, we're going
to have an entire demonstration
of David's energy elixir.
So stay with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- But how are we going to
watch a movie if we don't have
somebody to project the thing?
- Yeah.
- Where are you going
in such a hurry?
- Mr. Osborn, I still believe.
[BARKING]
- We started this film by asking
what's wrong with the world.
And we ended up discovering
what's right with it.
- We're asking
the same questions
now that we're asked
2,500 years ago.
- The form that you take
to fulfill your purpose
may look very different.
- The awareness inside us
is the basis of all reality.
- Love is a force.
It's a force that has power.
- Come on, you can do this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- You don't focus on
what holds you back, you
focus on what's already there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END PLAYBACK]
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- One of the main contributing
factors to our good health
is clean air, clean
water, good, healthy food.
We've all heard that.
And the problems are,
in our culture today,
we have a lot of
polluted air, we
have a lot of toxins
in our environment.
We're eating food that
is processed heavily.
And we start to accumulate
what we call toxins.
Patients come to me complaining
of toxic conditions.
They're overweight.
They have no energy.
Their joints ache.
They're inflamed.
So many of these
conditions are simply
addressed by proper
detoxification.
What we're beginning to
realize through Ayurveda
is that nature provided
a detox process for us
that's incredibly simple.
By understanding
these simple laws
of nature and these
principles, we
can begin to detoxify ourselves
every day, with every season,
and begin to enjoy good health
for the rest of our lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END PLAYBACK]
>> LISA: David Wolfe,
master blender chef,
says that most people that he
speaks to in all of the places
he goes around the
world, want more energy.
And that is what
we're doing today,
and this is like a
huge honor for me
because I get to stand here
with the master blender
chef, but and many, many
more ways, a master.
So I'm really
excited about this.
He's going to show
us exactly how
to create the perfect energy
drink that you can do anywhere.
Your home, office,
in the carpool line,
which is where I need it.
This is--
>> WOLFE: You can do this.
And there's no sugar here.
This is completely non-glycemic.
>> LISA: Very important.
>> WOLFE: So a different
idea of energy.
We could eat five
bananas at our desk,
and we'd get a lot of energy,
but it could crash really
quickly, or it might be too much
for doing that kind of work.
So this is an idea that's
based on having the energy,
having the focus to be
able to be at our desk
and be able to be in a car and
be able to run and do errands
but not tank out at some point.
>> LISA: And this is why the 4
o'clock coffee thing happens.
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: Yeah, because the
energy drops during that time
of the day.
>> WOLFE: And this
is stimulant-free.
>> LISA: Stimulant-free,
sugar-free--
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: For anyone concerned
about the glycemic index,
and so let's--
wow.
These powders are
so beautiful, too.
>> WOLFE: We've got some
interesting like superfoods
and super herbs is what we
call them right here lined up.
But first, the base
of this is going
to be something interesting,
and this is something
I've been doing for years.
And every time I do
this, wherever I'm at,
people are like, I've
never seen that before.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: No matter how
much I put it out there
into the internet, out there
in the world, at live events,
people still have never
seen this idea before.
So we're going to
look at this idea.
It's a new idea.
>> LISA: That's
why I'm so excited.
>> WOLFE: It's really
exciting, actually.
And to me, it's really valuable
if you live in a cold climate,
especially, or in
the winter, even
in Los Angeles in the
winter, because you
can have a hot tea, as
a base for a super food,
super herbal concoction.
So instead of the
old idea, which
is always a cold smoothie,
this is like a hot smoothie.
>> LISA: So this also gives you
that feeling of the warmth that
maybe a coffee would give you,
or a coffee house feeling would
give you.
>> WOLFE: Exactly.
>> LISA: But this is actually
feeding your body in many
different ways.
>> WOLFE: This is
nourishing you completely.
There's nothing here
that's stimulating you.
>> LISA: But it won't keep
you up until-- exactly.
>> WOLFE: Exactly.
So these are all what we
call tonic adaptogens.
These foods adapt
to what you need.
And if you need to get
to sleep at midnight,
then you're asleep.
It's a breakthrough, really.
It's a breakthrough
in our understanding
because our old idea was
like, in order to keep going,
I have to use stimulants.
In order to keep going,
I have to use sugar.
In order to keep going, I
have to eat at 3 o'clock,
like an energy
bar, to keep going.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: This is a whole other
idea that you could access
energy that nourishes you
and feeds into your jing,
for example, which is your
kidney adrenal complex,
and actually build your
primordial life essence
the more that you do this.
>> LISA: And you're not
burning out your immune system
in the meantime?
>> WOLFE: You're not
burning yourself out.
You're actually
feeding your adrenals.
You're feeding your immunity.
>> LISA: So how do the herbs to
balance themselves out and get
you to sleep when
you want to sleep?
How does that--
>> WOLFE: Well, we can bring
it down to the chemistry,
like over here, we have
astragalus and astragalus is
dual directional.
So it's filled with what
we call saponins or soap,
and what's also a soap?
A soap, one part of the soap
molecule is water soluble,
and the other side
is fat soluble.
So that's how soap works.
It can strip off the
oils off your body,
for example, because
one side grabs the oil
and strips it off.
Now in your body,
these saponins have
dual directional qualities.
For example, if your
immune system is low,
they'll bring it up.
If your immune system is too
high-- asthma, allergies,
it brings it down.
>> LISA: And these herbs exist
in the rainforests and other
Indigenous areas where--
>> WOLFE: Where are they from?
Well, we can go through that.
We'll do that as we
develop this drink.
>> LISA: Yeah, it's just
interesting because you can
find these herbs.
That's how
communities completely
are sustainable and
live, way before us,
and of course,
ancient civilizations
have always existed on
these types of herbs.
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: So this is old
information brought to the new
format, which is beautiful.
>> WOLFE: It's my
favorite phrase actually.
Ancient old, brand new.
>> LISA: Beautiful.
>> WOLFE: Ancient old brand new.
>> LISA: Exactly.
Right, OK.
>> WOLFE: So here's what
we're going to start with.
In China, they had extensively
studied their herbs
more than any other
culture in the world.
And they found that the
longest-lived people in China
live in the south, in
a particular province
in the south central
region of China
where a certain herb grows.
They didn't know that back then.
They just found out these
people are living a long time.
Let's go find out
what's going on.
The Chinese Academy
of Sciences tracked it
down to a particular
herb, which is gynostemma.
Gyno, G-Y-N-O,
stemma like a stem,
and it's associated with
longevity and immunity.
And what they found out through
the Chinese Academy of Research
Sciences that they were actually
dealing with an herb that
was probably the most
chemically complex herb in all
of Chinese medicine.
And they started ranking
it back in the day,
maybe it came in at 100,
now it's number one.
It's the number one
Chinese herb of all.
>> LISA: Longevity herb?
>> WOLFE: Longevity, immunity--
>> LISA: Wow.
>> WOLFE: Complete
tonic adaptogen.
So it helps you adapt
to whatever is going on.
It's really an amazing substance
and it has great flavor.
So the point of all
that is, is that's
going to be the base
of our whole drink.
>> LISA: And that's
just the starting--
that's just a starting point.
>> WOLFE: That's just step one.
OK.
Now you don't have to
know-- the great thing
about this is don't have to
know anything about any of this.
All you have to do is
just go, oh, I just
put that tea bag in there.
That's it.
>> LISA: That's beautiful.
>> WOLFE: Isn't that great?
So we've got some
hot water here.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: So What I'm going
to do is I'm just going to get
our tea bags out first.
So rip this open.
It normally comes
with a little thing,
but I had to pull that off,
because it won't hang on here.
So we're going to
drop that in there.
So that's our Spring
Dragon Longevity Tea.
That's gynostemma tea.
So that's the tea right there.
>> LISA: The healthiest
tea on Earth.
>> WOLFE: It is the
healthiest tea on Earth.
This is the hottest herb
in the world right now.
I actually think that gynostemma
can eclipse green tea.
>> LISA: It's actually
caffeine-free also,
which is very interesting.
And there's a lot of
other things in it, too.
>> WOLFE: Right.
Now these are gynostemma
leaves, that when they're dried,
they're then soaked in the
juices of ginseng, rhodiola,
goji berry, and a
few other herbs.
And then they're dried again.
So it adds a little
bit of a pizzazz to it.
>> LISA: It's got a
superfood in there.
And a couple of things.
OK, great.
>> WOLFE: OK, so we'll
just throw two in there.
We'll leave this one out.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: So then we're
going to put our tea here.
So this is going to be
like a hot elixir or a tea.
So I'm going to
put that in there.
You're going to see
it change color.
And I like to steep things.
So we're going to
leave it in there.
>> LISA: My cooking
demo from Blender Chef.
[LAUGHS]
>> WOLFE: This is
how I live at home.
I live in the forest,
and I have wild herbs,
and we make teas out
of our spring water.
By the way, this is spring
water, not filtered tap water,
real spring water.
>> LISA: Never microwave it.
>> WOLFE: Never.
>> LISA: I think you probably--
that's a good thing to know,
is to not microwave your water.
>> WOLFE: So we're looking good.
This is a great start.
OK now, we're going to
start assembling this drink.
So I'm going to reach over
here and grab our blender.
I'm a Blender Chef after all.
[LAUGHING]
You like that?
>> LISA: Blender Chef.
>> WOLFE: I was on this TV show
one time, and somebody said,
what do you do?
And I said, oh,
I'm a blender chef.
I just made it up on the spot,
and then that became my call.
So I'm a gourmet blender
chef after all these years.
I really am, actually, I mean
this is-- that's how I live,
that's what I do.
>> LISA: --everything.
And that's one of
the great things
is that you'll be able to see
that with David is a lot more
of these demos on Gaiam
TV, because there's
a lot more that you can do.
Blood sugar balancing, all sorts
of great things, which he does.
OK.
>> WOLFE: Again, I've just
got to break this pattern.
This is totally
nourishing at every level.
It feeds into your
kidneys and adrenals.
heart and liver.
It feeds your spleen.
It feeds your brain.
Nothing is being depleted.
It's all giving, and
we get the energy too.
That's the idea here.
>> LISA: That's the most
important thing here.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: That's breaking
the pattern of what,
the addiction to the
caffeine and the sugar?
>> WOLFE: Or just the addiction
to the idea that in order
to get energy, I have
to have a stimulant.
In order to get energy,
you have to take sugar in.
Just break that idea up.
OK.
So the first ingredient
is going to be
one of my favorites,
ever, of all time,
and I grow this particular
super fruit, which is lucuma,
and it's egg fruit,
or canistel, and it
comes from South America,
and the lucuma tree
can live to be
over 500 years old.
And I have eaten
a lucuma fruit--
>> LISA: Oh my goodness.
>> WOLFE: --from a tree
that was over 500 years old.
>> LISA: Really?
It's not a juicy fruit, though?
>> WOLFE: It's a really weird.
It's like, they
call it egg fruit
because it's like a hard
boiled egg consistency.
>> LISA: Inside the--
>> WOLFE: Yeah, you know the
yolk of a hard boiled egg?
It's kind of
feathery and powdery?
That's how this fruit is.
>> LISA: Comes out.
So it's not a juicy fruit.
>> WOLFE: It is not
a juicy fruit, no.
Yeah, and they use it as
an emulsifier or a creamer,
historically.
So it kind of takes
things that are sugary
and mixes them with
things that are oily,
and brings them together.
>> LISA: And it forms
kind of a cream?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: Interesting.
>> WOLFE: And it's
brilliant flavor,
and it's a low
glycemic sweetener.
Essentially is why
we're using it.
So it's going to add the
flavor, but not the sugar hit.
>> LISA: So you can also use
it for food, cooking foods?
>> WOLFE: Absolutely.
Yeah.
You can use this
for salad dressings,
all different kinds of
foods, elixirs, smoothies,
it goes every direction.
So we're going to
put that in there.
That's like a heaping
tablespoon of lucuma.
>> LISA: Lucuma.
>> WOLFE: Lucuma.
Now, this is a product
that I basically
brought into the world.
It's a baby.
It's one of my babies.
This is chaga mycelium,
or chaga, C-H-A-GA.
And this is one of the
great medicinal mushrooms
in the world.
And this is a super
powerful jing substance
in the Chinese
understanding, which
means it feeds into
your kidneys, adrenals,
it's really good for your skin.
>> LISA: David was explaining
earlier the difference between
Chi and jing.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: Interesting
distinction.
>> WOLFE: The three
treasure system.
So we've heard chi, it gets
thrown around the martial arts
world a lot.
We've heard that our
whole lives probably.
But that's only one of the
energies in Chinese medicine.
>> LISA: Chi being the flow--
>> WOLFE: And it's your
daily flow of energy.
It's the way you move
energy throughout the day.
It's the way that your immune
system mobilizes energy.
So that's chi, but
it's day-to-day.
OK, so it's like let's say
you're into martial arts,
it's the first
round of the fight.
That's chi.
Now, jing is like the
15th round of the fight.
It's your primordial energy.
It's like Muhammad Ali versus
Joe Frazier in the 15th round.
That's your prime-- like,
it's your will to survive.
>> LISA: Is it your
genetic energy?
>> WOLFE: It's your
genetic energy.
Exactly.
And you get it from
your grandparents.
>> LISA: Oh.
>> WOLFE: So you get a certain
amount when you're born from
your grandparents.
>> LISA: Wow.
>> WOLFE: So if you had
healthy grandparents, like,
if your grandma-- like my
grandmother lived to be 100.
So it's like, OK, that's good.
That's a good thing, right?
>> LISA: I have a couple of
100-year old ancestors as well.
>> WOLFE: OK.
So see, that's good.
So that means that you
probably have potential
for good amount of jing.
But you can build it
through your life.
And there are certain
things that help.
Now, chaga mushroom
is one of them.
So we're going to
put that in next.
This is immunological.
It's an immunological substance.
Vitamin C is great, but if you
read Linus Pauling's books--
which I did--
it only helps about 3%
with the common cold.
3%.
>> LISA: Vitamin C?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, that's nothing.
That's like not very much.
>> LISA: Oh, this is a great--
>> WOLFE: I'm talking--
>> LISA: By the way, great thing
to drink if you have a cold
coming on.
>> WOLFE: Absolutely.
Yeah.
>> LISA: Very good to know.
>> WOLFE: And there's no sugar,
because sugar feeds infections.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: Right?
>> LISA: So important.
>> WOLFE: So important
to know that.
>> LISA: All those C powders
out there that are mixed with
sugars will just deplete the
immune system while trying to--
>> WOLFE: Do the right thing,
>> LISA: Yeah.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> WOLFE: And they're
trying to sneak in on taste.
We're just more clever now.
We've got more tools.
Like lucuma allows
you to get anything in
and all tastes good.
>> LISA: OK, so tablespoon
lucuma, chaga, powder.
>> WOLFE: It was a teaspoon,
basically heaping teaspoon
of chaga powder.
That's C-H-A-G-A. So
the next one is maca.
And maca is a tonic
adaptogen, it's
a superfood from the Andes.
It increases your
uptake of oxygen.
It's almost a complete protein
and it contains all the hormone
precursors.
So it kind of preloads
all your glands.
So producing energy has a
lot to do with your hormones,
actually.
Like when you're 16, and
hormones are turning on,
you have energy.
When you're 60, it's different.
>> LISA: What about the
stress hormone, cortisol?
What if that's raised?
Is this a good
cortisol balancer?
>> WOLFE: Absolutely.
Maca is one of the
best, actually.
It's a tonic adaptogen. So that
means it's dual-directional.
Let's say you have
elevated cortisol.
It brings it down.
Let's say you have
elevated estrogen, it's--
maca is a cruciferous vegetable.
So it contains
indole-3-carbinol, and DIM,
which have now been shown
to bring down bad estrogen.
>> LISA: Which is also a
cancer-fighting element.
>> WOLFE: Absolutely.
So there's a lot of
products out I've
seen on the internet
that are now
concentrating, like
indole-3-carbinol, or I3C
and DIM, and mixing
it with maca so you
get a higher fraction of that.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: But it's
in maca naturally
because it's a
cruciferous vegetables.
It's the highest altitude
crop in the world.
We've got it as a powder here.
So that's going in.
We're talking about food, first.
Before we have to
go to bioidenticals,
or whatever is beyond
food, let's try
to work with food
first, and we've
got the most powerful
foods in the world now.
>> LISA: It is amazing yeah.
>> WOLFE: It's not
like apple anymore.
I love apples or grape.
They're amazing.
I love lettuce.
Lettuce is amazing, but this
is a whole order of magnitude
greater.
>> LISA: Yes.
>> WOLFE: Yes.
>> LISA: This is the, ah,
level way beyond that.
Yes.
OK.
>> WOLFE: OK, so this
next one is astragalus,
which is one of the great
chi tonic herbs in Chinese
medicine, and we just
put a teaspoon in here,
it's just a small amount but
this is like pure energy.
It's vital life force and it's
a polysaccharide, versus just
a saccharide.
A saccharide is like glucose.
So if you ate an apple, you're
getting a ton of glucose,
and you'll get a kick
of energy, for sure, you
can get stimulated.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: But you could crash
depending on your metabolism.
Whereas this is
a polysaccharide,
so it's a long chain
sugar, and therefore you
burn it off slowly so that so
you don't get a spike from it.
>> LISA: That makes more sense.
So this is something that helps
maintain the glycemic index.
>> WOLFE: That's right.
It keeps you in balance.
So astragalus is one
of the preeminent chi
herbs in Chinese medicine.
>> LISA: I've heard
it astragalus.
>> WOLFE: In-- we've
got a spoon here.
>> LISA: No smell.
>> WOLFE: I was just
like, do we have a spoon?
I just bumped right into it.
So we'll get that all
the way out of there.
>> LISA: Every last little bit.
>> WOLFE: Every last little
bit, because these things are
valuable.
>> LISA: They're valuable, yeah.
>> WOLFE: When I have
these in my house,
I get every last little bit
out because this stuff is--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
It's amazing that we can
have access to these things.
>> LISA: Yes.
>> WOLFE: Inexpensively as well.
And ashwagandha, which is
our next herb, is Indian.
It's from India, and it's one of
the preeminent tonic adaptogen
herbs there.
What do I mean by
tonic adaptogen?
I mean, you can eat it as food.
>> LISA: Really?
>> WOLFE: It's a food.
>> LISA: You can just
dip your finger--
>> WOLFE: It's not an herb like
where you take too much and you
have to lay off of it.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: You can--
it's a food category.
It's a food class.
>> LISA: That's an interesting
actually topic right there.
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: That you can--
there's a difference between
being hungry and having
your cells being satiated.
There's a huge--
David was explaining
this a little bit to us
beforehand about your
body's cells are--
you're never hungry.
>> WOLFE: I'm never hungry.
I'm overnourished cause I
eat these stuff all the time.
So actually, most of the time,
I don't really eat meals.
Maybe one time of day, if
I'm in like, New York City,
I'll go out to a raw food
restaurant with my friends,
that kind of thing.
But then I get there, and
I'm like I'm not actually
even really hungry.
>> LISA: I mean,
what do you eat?
Do you get hungry, ever?
>> WOLFE: Never.
I'm never hungry.
>> LISA: You just eat these,
and these nourish your cells.
Your cells are fully satiated.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: So you
don't have cravings,
you don't have highs and lows,
you don't have sugar cravings?
>> WOLFE: I don't--
I'm not hypoglycemic.
So if I don't eat, I
don't start getting
this kind of thing going on.
This is very powerful--
actually what we're doing here,
is we're getting a whole
classification, not only
nutrients but also minerals
that we don't normally get,
that help fight these kind
of blood sugar swings.
For example, manganese.
Manganese is present here.
Very difficult to get manganese
from your standard lettuce,
banana, apple diet.
So what ends up
happening is if we're
trying to get it
from food, we end up
becoming mineral deficient.
It's just the way it is.
A lot of-- let me
just clarify this.
A lot of herbs and
superfoods are actually
mineral supplements, is-- that's
what I'm trying to say here.
>> LISA: The hunger comes
from being mineral deficient?
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: The hunger pains,
the growling stomach?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, absolutely.
The whole hypoglycemia syndrome
is a mineral deficiency
syndrome.
>> LISA: Interesting.
>> WOLFE: So our
body is going, look,
we need something right now.
If you eat seaweed, for example,
seaweed is so rich in minerals
that after a year of
eating seaweed every day,
you go out of
hypoglycemia, you're
not hypoglycemic anymore.
>> LISA: Interesting.
>> WOLFE: Very important
to know about that.
>> LISA: All right, so the
last one is-- my goodness,
a lot of good stuff.
>> WOLFE: Vanilla, of course,
and that's just a small amount
of vanilla.
Vanilla is so critical to
lock the whole formula down.
But if you do too much,
you're going to get like--
the whole thing is going
to go into vanilla,
and you can do too much.
So we just put like
really a quarter, maybe
a half of a teaspoon here.
Very small amount.
So, bam, that's in there now.
>> LISA: All right.
>> WOLFE: So we've
got ashwagandha,
which is our tonic adaptogen,
that's just like astragalus,
actually but in India.
Ashwagandha was called in
India the ginseng of India.
It's like the preeminent root.
>> LISA: Right, that and
astragalus is the same thing
to the Chinese medicine
community, right?
As ashwagandha is--
>> WOLFE: Yes,
yes, very much so.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: So now, the reason
why we did it this way is
because if I had
made a mistake--
let's say I'm at home and
I have my vanilla bag,
and am I going--
and all of a sudden
the whole bag
goes in, if I had put this
liquid in first, I'm done.
I just lost everything.
Right?
So that's why I do
the powders first.
It's just a way it's--
a logic.
>> LISA: Beautiful
blend of powders.
>> WOLFE: Yeah, so now we've
got the powders in there.
Again, we could even
put fresh foods in here.
I'm into fresh foods, but to eat
a lot of fruit or even berries
right, at your desk at 4
o'clock in the afternoon, when
you you've got to power
up, get everything done,
get out the door, run your
errands, go pick up the kids,
go pay the bills, go over there,
>> LISA: Make dinner--
>> WOLFE: Drop the kids off at
Capoeira class or whatever has
to happen, you know what I mean?
>> LISA: Just explained my life.
Yeah.
[CHUCKLING]
>> WOLFE: The fresh food is
going to hit and then crash
fast.
Like it's going to be glycemic.
Our fruit is generally
too glycemic,
whereas this is going to-- it's
going to power you through.
You're going to be--
>> LISA: So you can even
pre-mix all this stuff,
have it in your car, and
your cup, or whatever?
OK.
All right.
Good to know.
>> WOLFE: OK.
So now let's pour this in here.
Let's see how this goes.
This is going to be kind of fun.
Make sure the teabag
doesn't go in there.
>> LISA: I know.
Let me--
>> WOLFE: You're going
to block it for me?
>> LISA: Yeah.
>> WOLFE: Yay.
>> LISA: There you go.
>> WOLFE: I'll just make
enough for both of us.
So we just pour it all in there.
>> LISA: OK.
Make enough for everyone.
>> WOLFE: Yeah, this would
normally be two cups.
So this is actually about 3
cups that we just did here.
So we're going to
lock the top on here.
>> LISA: Please.
[CHUCKLING]
>> WOLFE: OK.
>> LISA: Locked, right?
>> WOLFE: That's going
to be for you to blend.
>> LISA: For me to blend.
>> WOLFE: So Lisa
Garr is getting her--
>> LISA: Using my power tools.
>> WOLFE: Blender Chef lessons.
>> LISA: All right.
So this is how, you sure this
isn't going to go everywhere?
>> WOLFE: It's going to go, yep.
>> LISA: Now higher?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, higher.
[BLENDING]
Yeah.
>> LISA: I purposely did
not talk during that time
because it would have been--
>> WOLFE: Oh wait, it turn off.
[SHRIEKS]
>> LISA: Almost had a moment.
All right.
Ooh, that's nice.
We're going to need the
cups to drink out of.
>> WOLFE: Yup, we got
some cups in here.
OK, here we go.
Let's give this a go now.
>> LISA: Our off-camera Vanna.
>> WOLFE: There you go.
>> LISA: Thank you very much.
All right.
>> WOLFE: Now, if
all has gone well,
this is going to taste amazing.
>> LISA: Cheers--
>> WOLFE: Cheers!
>> LISA: --from master
Blender Chef, David Wolfe.
>> WOLFE: Wow.
>> LISA: Ooh, that
is really good.
That is really good.
Oh my goodness.
For more of the recipe,
go to GaiamTV.com
to find out how to
do this on your own.
Thank you so much.
>> WOLFE: Thank you.
Have the best day ever.
>> LISA: You're awesome.
The best day ever.
[CHUCKLING]
Now that we have a
ton of energy here
on Gaiam TV, on "Gaiam
Inspirations," all right,
so we're going to take your
Twitter and your Facebook
questions right now that
you have any for David here.
Frances on Twitter is saying,
I drink a lot of caffeine,
will I feel energized
from this drink,
and how does she get off of
the caffeine, by the way.
>> WOLFE: Well,
the answer is yes,
you'll get a lot of
energy from this drink,
but it's totally a
different paradigm.
There's no stimulants.
When you do come off
a caffeine or coffee,
you're going to have a low.
>> LISA: Right.
>> WOLFE: So you have to
just get through that.
But actually, the
ingredients in here,
like the ashwagandha
and the astragalus
are tonic adaptogens.
So they help your liver
accommodate the withdrawal
symptoms.
So it's actually going
to help you to get
through the withdrawal process.
>> LISA: That's a great answer.
So the caffeine
from the coffee is
more of a super high,
and then a crash,
and then it might
prevent you from being
able to get to sleep easily.
>> WOLFE: Right.
It's like an adrenal dump.
It causes your adrenal
to just fire off,
and then eventually,
there's like nothing
left in the bank account.
>> LISA: And that
taxes the adrenals.
>> WOLFE: Right.
>> LISA: So this
sustains the adrenals.
>> WOLFE: This actually
nourishes your adrenals,
exactly.
>> LISA: So that's
what we need more of.
>> WOLFE: This is that just flip
around of the paradigm like,
wait a second, this can give
me energy but it's not taking
anything.
It doesn't have any sugar.
It's like amazing.
It fits right in that--
this is Chinese tonic
herbalism, actually.
>> LISA: And where do people
find all the items that we just
showed all of them?
>> WOLFE:
LongevityWarehouse.com.
>> LISA: OK.
>> WOLFE: That's where
we've made it all available.
And it's a really great
thing, because it's
all the friends that I've
worked with all these years.
We're all together working
on this business now.
It's really wonderful.
>> LISA: So it's Ron
Teeguarden's products,
and your products, and it's
everything that has been
approved--
>> WOLFE: products--
>> LISA: And it's all been
approved by you, of course.
>> WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
>> LISA: So it
has to have your--
>> WOLFE: Stamp of approval.
>> LISA: Yes.
>> WOLFE: Yes.
By the way, I'm not into
selling commodities.
I'm sourced right to the
farm in every product.
So there's not a commodity
on my website, ever.
>> LISA: So you hold a certain
level of integrity with
the products.
>> WOLFE: Absolutely, and you
can taste it and you can tell,
and I invite people to
really try what's out there.
And then you'll be able
to discern quality.
>> LISA: So there's--
and then, also,
your products are also sold
in health food stores as well.
So it's--
>> WOLFE: We're just
developing that, yeah.
>> LISA: Yeah.
>> WOLFE: That's kind of fun.
I've had stuff in and out
of health food stores.
I like the internet better
because you can educate better,
right?
Like we're doing now,
we're able to touch you
and you're able to
tune in to us and see
what the stuff is about.
But after a while, people
to get-- they know.
And so then the health
food store makes sense,
because it's close, it's easy.
You run down the road,
and you can just grab it.
>> LISA: Well, this is
also all about education.
It's about how to--
I mean, as David said, he
can sustain his entire day
on these various types
of energy drinks.
So I would take these
products and I would put them
in maybe like a little--
like a bottle, and if
I'm going to pick up--
carpool my daughter in the
middle of the afternoon,
I would just make my
little tea in the car
with some warm water,
and I would be set.
Right?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, I do that
with a mason jar all the time.
>> LISA: You do?
>> WOLFE: Yeah, I'll
have a mason jar,
and I'll throw a bunch
of ingredients in there.
And then, let's say
I'm out and about,
let's say I'm able to
get some spring water,
or something like that,
I'll pour it in there.
Shake it up, drink it.
So I do that a lot.
I travel around with a
mason jar quite a bit.
It's very handy.
>> LISA: So it's an
on-the-go type of thing,
which is very convenient.
And I mean, the convenience
is where-- what got us here
in the first place.
So I want to make sure
that people understand
that you're
sustaining your body,
that this is a
long-term solution.
>> WOLFE: It's the
simplest thing, ever.
You don't ever have to--
I'm not going through
drive-throughs ever.
Don't need to.
>> LISA: It's all about--
>> WOLFE: It's all there.
>> LISA: Yeah.
>> WOLFE: Yeah.
>> LISA: It's all about health,
it's all about getting out
of the disease state and into
a state of vitality so that,
you said so beautifully at the
beginning of this interview,
that you want to live.
>> WOLFE: That's so important.
I want to live, and I'm
trying to fit three lifetimes
into this one.
[CHUCKLING]
>> LISA: You mean?
>> WOLFE: Right?
I mean, like I'm
cramming it full.
It's like, it's midnight, no.
I'm squeezing more
out of the day.
I'm not going to
give up on the day,
and I'll squeeze every bit of
juice out of every single day.
>> LISA: I absolutely--
>> WOLFE: That's so-- it's so
amazing to really live like
that.
Because that to me is like
what our ancestors always
wanted for us, right?
We're the descendants
of our ancestors
and their wish was that
we could have a happy
life, that we could have a
healthy life, that we could
live in paradise, that we could
have all the amazing gadgets
that we have today, that we
can have great relationships,
great families, and we get that.
It's like, let's turn that on.
>> LISA: So that's the bottom
line of what we're telling--
on what we're talking about here
and what we're educating you
about here at Gaiam TV
in "Gaiam Inspirations."
So I just want to say thank you,
and thank you very, very much.
>> WOLFE: Thank you.
It's been a pleasure.
Thanks for having me on.
>> LISA: Thank you for all the
information you impart on this
world, too.
You do so much for people.
>> WOLFE: Thank you.
>> LISA: And did so much
for people listening
because the responses
back has been great.
If you want to watch a replay
of this, or an interview
if you want to share
it with your friends,
you just go to GaiamTV.com and
you can sign up right there
for a free trial
subscription, and also, you
can download David's
energy elixir recipe
right there at GaiamTV.com.
It's exclusively
for the members.
And also, coming on
GaiamTV.com is the 90-minute--
the full 90-minute interview
that I did with David,
and we have two more of those
drink recipes that we did.
One is for balancing blood
sugar, very important,
and the other one is for
boosting your brain power
and your brain function
to very specific recipes
put together with David's
20-plus years of experience
and an exclusive for all of you
for signing up at GaiamTV.com.
So sign up now, and
thank you so much.
And as David Wolfe says,
have the best day ever.
[CHUCKLING] So
thank you so much.
You've just been--
>> WOLFE: Thank you so much.
>> LISA: --a rock star.
>> WOLFE: It's been wonderful.
>> LISA: And thank you for the
good food and the good drinks,
and we'll continue to spread
great cheer to people,
especially during the season.
>> WOLFE: Thank you.